PEP 9999: C API Working Group Charter (#3476)
python/peps: peps/pep-9999.rst

PEP: 9999
Title: C API Working Group Charter
Author: Guido van Rossum <guido@python.org>,
        Petr Viktorin <encukou@gmail.com>,
        Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>,
        Steve Dower <steve.dower@python.org>,
        Irit Katriel <irit@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Topic: Typing
Created: 11-Oct-2023
Python-Version: 3.13

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to establish the C API Working Group:
a small committee of Python core developers responsible for

> maintaining and developing the Python C API.

Author: Good catch. Could you phrase that in the form of a suggested change to the doc? I'm a little overwhelmed to come up with a better phrasing here.

> a small committee of Python core developers responsible for
> maintaining and developing the Python C API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a small committee of Python core developers responsible for
overseeing and coordinating the development and maintenance of the Python C API.
```

> maintaining and developing the Python C API.

Author: Thanks Irit, I applied that. I approve of it too. Petr already said he approves of the document with that change.

The working group will maintain
documentation, test suites and tooling related to Python's C API.
It is the deciding body for changes to the C API,
from the addition or removal of individual API functions, types, etc.,
to the the acceptance of new designs of a more or less radical nature.

The working group's mandate is to represent the interests of all Python users,
but especially all maintainers of code that uses Python's C API,
whether in the context of CPython, using an alternate Python implementation,

> or using a binding framework for other languages.

Reviewer 2: I suggest to be even more explicit about programming languages which are not C:

```suggestion
or using a binding framework for other programming languages (such as C++ and Rust).
```

The working group serves at the pleasure of the Python Steering Council.
The working group's members are the listed authors of this PEP.
This document serves as the working group's charter.

Epigraph
========

| KEEPER
| Stop!
  Who would cross the Bridge of Death must answer me these questions three,
  ere the other side he see.

#. What was Python named after?
#. What was Python 2's EOL?
#. What is the optimal strategy to evolve the CPython C API?

| LANCELOT
| Auuuuuuuugh!

Motivation
==========

Despite many discussions and in-person meetings
at core developer sprints and Language Summits,
and a thorough inventory of the problems and stakeholders of the C API,
no consensus has been reached about many contentious issues,
including, but not limted to:

> - Conventions for designing new API functions;
> - how to deal with compatibility;
> - what's the best strategy for handling errors;
> - the future of the Stable ABI and the Limited API;
> - whether to switch to a handle-based API convention (and how).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Conventions for designing new API functions;
- How to deal with compatibility;
- What's the best strategy for handling errors;
- The future of the Stable ABI and the Limited API;
- Whether to switch to a handle-based API convention (and how).
```

PEP: 9999
Title: C API Working Group Charter
Author: Guido van Rossum <guido@python.org>,
        Petr Viktorin <encukou@gmail.com>,
        Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>,
        Steve Dower <steve.dower@python.org>,
        Irit Katriel <irit@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Topic: Typing
Created: 11-Oct-2023
Python-Version: 3.13

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to establish the C API Working Group:
a small committee of Python core developers responsible for
maintaining and developing the Python C API.

> The working goup will maintain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The working group will maintain
```

documentation, test suites and tooling related to Python's C API.
It is the deciding body for changes to the C API,
from the addition or removal of individual API functions, types, etc.,
to the the acceptance of new designs of a more or less radical nature.

> The working goup's mandate is to represent the interests of all Python users,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The working group's mandate is to represent the interests of all Python users,
```

proposals, requirements, constraints, and conventions,
to make progress without having a small trusted group of deciders.

At the 2023 Language Summit in Salt Lake City it was decided to start work on
an `inventory of problems <https://github.com/capi-working-group/problems>`__.
At the 2023 core developer sprint in Brno this work is more or less finished
and after a discussion it appeared that the next step is to establish
a working group to ensure that we're not stymied forever.

The Steering Council has
`indicated <https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/201#issuecomment-1648848155>`__
its desire to delegate decisions about the C API
to such a working group, anticipating its formal establishment.

Specification
=============

We propose the creation of a new group, the C API Working Group.
This group will be responsible for overseeing and coordinating the development and
maintenance of the Python C API.
It will do this by establishing the principles underpinning the work
and publishing guidelines that the core developers can refer to.

The "operations and process" section below describes
how the working group operates and how it is governed.

Mandate
-------

> The working group's mandate is to ensure that the Python C API is:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The working group's mandate is to ensure that the Python C API is suitable for
all users and contributors to the API, without unduly preferencing one group
over another. The working group will identify exemplar stakeholders, their
needs and preferences, and will determine a plan for meeting these needs
equitably and sustainably.
```

Maybe?

Author: Oddly, this also feels a bit specific. What does the WG do once we're done making a plan? More below.

Reviewer 3: Executes the plan :-)

I think my main aim is to define a scope here, but not the plan itself, other than to require inclusiveness and fairness (without strictly defining who/what/why/where/etc.). We've done a lot of analysis so far, but if we do a proper summary and report on that, we shouldn't need to update this PEP if we decide on a slightly different path.

Author: Okay, I'll try to wordsmith your suggestion a bit to imply that.

* **Useful**: It should provide access to all relevant functionality.
* **Ergonomic**: It should be easy to use.
* **Fair**: It should serve the purposes of a variety of stakeholders.
* **Stable**: It should avoid requiring users to update their code more than necessary.
* **Evolvable**: It should give Python implementers enough freedom to change implementation details.
* **Maintainable**: It should be easy to maintain and extend.

For several of these items, a more comprehensive listing of constraints
can be found in the PEP (number TO DO) which is based on the 
`inventory of C API problems <https://github.com/capi-working-group/problems>`__.

The stability requirement is not meant to prevent sweeping C API changes ---
one of the working group's initial tasks is to settle the question of
whether we intend any landmark changes to the C API in the coming five years,
and if so, to select or write a suitable proposal.
However, the working group is required to carefully consider the migration
efforts required of package maintainers and other stakeholders.

Operations and process
----------------------

The working group has at least three members,

> comprised of prominent Python core developers.

Reviewer 3: Maybe "active" rather than prominent? Or some word to imply that we are able to commit time and effort towards it?

Author: I took "prominent" (but not the rest of the sentence) from Jelle's PEP 729. And being active doesn't always translate into suitability.

There's no way to enforce time and effort taken -- we all do our best, and if a member fails to show up repeatedly, the rest of us have to make a point of replacing that member. But I don't think that needs to be written down. The in-person discussion about the Editorial Board today indicated that the SC (or at least Thomas) thinks committees are best positioned to decide on their own renewal policies.

IOW I think "prominent" is right here. The real sting in this sentence is in "core developers". Jelle's PEP has "community members". But I feel that since almost all C API work ends up on the shoulders of the core devs, it's fair that the WG is comprised of core devs. (This is different from typing, where a lot of the work is a burden for 3rd party tooling maintainers.) I do have some words about listening to stakeholders.

Reviewer 3: After spending a bit more time thinking about it, I think my concern with "prominent" is that it doesn't really give someone a self-development path that would lead here. That said, I encourage virtually everyone I mentor to "become more prominent", because it is the reality of how these things work out, but I'm just a little uncomfortable with making it a formal requirement.

I'm far less concerned about the core developers part, because that's already a reasonably well-defined aspiration (even if, in practice, being prominent is a sizable part of it).

But I feel I've already dedicated too much thinking on this point, and am forcing you to spend too much time reading my thoughts :-) So I'll leave it

The members should consider the needs of the various stakeholders carefully.

The Steering Council would appoint the initial working group.
There is no term limit for working group members.
Working group members may resign their position at any time, for any reason.
There is an expectation that the membership will change over time.

To determine replacements,
nominations will be collected from the core developer community.
Self-nominations are allowed.
The existing working group will then decide the replacement member(s)
from the nominees.
The expectation is that this would be done by fiat,
but the working group can choose a replacement by any means they see fit,
including a vote.

The working group remains accountable to the Steering Council.
At any point, for any reason, the Steering Council could
(publicly or privately) make a specific change
or request a non-specific change to the composition of the working group.

> We acknowledge that this is not a particularly democratic structure

Reviewer 3: FWIW, I think this is a good structure for this group.

It may allay some concerns if we explicitly say before here that one of the responsibilities of the WG is to collect feedback and hear from other interested parties? I've seen people read a proposal of this shape before and assume that the appointees will only ever listen to themselves, and so they propose regular voting to avoid it. But I think if we explicitly say somewhere that part of the WG's job is to listen, it should soothe some of those concerns.

Author: I took this verbatim from Jelle's PEP. The typing folks did a lot of wordsmithing.

There are several mentions of stakeholders in the doc already, informing them, listening to them, fairly serving a variety of them. So I think that's covered.

(thanks to the great moderation efforts by Irit Katriel)
and after a discussion it appeared that the next step is to establish
a working group to ensure that we're not stymied forever.

The Steering Council has
`indicated <https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/201#issuecomment-1648848155>`__
its desire to delegate decisions about the C API
to the C API working group even before its formal establishment.

Specification
=============

We propose the creation of a new group, the C API Working Group.
This group will be responsible for developing and maintaining the Python C API,
and for solving the above problems.

The "operations and process" section below describes
how the working group operates and how it is governed.

Mandate
-------

The working group's mandate is to ensure that the Python C API is:

* **Useful**: It should provide access to all relevant functionality.
* **Ergonomic**: It should be easy to use.
* **Fair**: It should serve the purposes of a variety of stakeholders.
* **Stable**: It should avoid requiring users to update their code more than necessary.
* **Evolvable**: It should give Python implementers enough freedom to change implementation details.

> * **Maintainable**: It should be easy to maintain and extend.

Author: But all the requirements also apply to the current API, so if the working group decides not to adopt a new API, all these requirements still apply.

I do have some hesitations about this list, Jelle's list wasn't very applicable, and I even admit getting some words from GitHub Copilot. Possibly we need a much more generally formulated mandate? Suggestions welcome!

> * **Maintainable**: It should be easy to maintain and extend.

Reviewer 4: The working group's mandate is to ensure that the Python C API is good, and to determine what *good* means in this context.

> * **Maintainable**: It should be easy to maintain and extend.

Reviewer 3: +1 to Petr. The list feels very specific to have baked into the charter, and while I don't think it's controversial and we'll probably end up all agreeing on what's here right now, defining "good" should probably be one of our first actions as a WG.

> * **Maintainable**: It should be easy to maintain and extend.

Author: Also +1 to Petr, but also ensuring that it *remains* good, and to update the definition of "good" occasionally.

@encukou Could you suggest a specific edit to replace both the sentence above ("The WG's mandate is...") and the bullet points?

> * **Maintainable**: It should be easy to maintain and extend.

Author: I've rewritten this section using a mash-up of @zooba's words. Please have another look at the Mandate section.

For several of these items, a more comprehensive listing of constraints

> can be found in the PEP being drafted by Irit Katriel on the basis of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be found in the PEP XXXX which is based on the 
```

efforts required of package maintainers and other stakeholders.

Operations and process
----------------------

The working group has at least three members,
comprised of prominent Python core developers.
The members should consider the needs of the various stakeholders carefully.

The Steering Council would appoint the initial working group.
There is no term limit for working group members.
Working group members may resign their position at any time, for any reason.
There is an expectation that the membership will change over time.

To determine replacements,
nominations will be collected from the core developer community.
Self-nominations are allowed.
The existing working group will then decide the replacement member(s)
from the nominees.
The expectation is that this would be done by fiat,
but the working group can choose a replacement by any means they see fit,
including a vote.

The working group remains accountable to the Steering Council.
At any point, for any reason, the Steering Council could
(publicly or privately) make a specific change
or request a non-specific change to the composition of the working group.

> We acknowledge that this is a not particularly democratic structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We acknowledge that this is not a particularly democratic structure
```

and puts a lot of faith in the working group.
However, the Python community has a long history of success
with not particularly democratic structures!
We believe that self-governance, cycling of membership,
and accountability to the Steering Council will be sufficient

> to ensure that the Typing Council is meeting the needs of the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to ensure that the C API workgroup is meeting the needs of the community.
```

The working group may operate primarily through reviews of GitHub issues and PRs.
Regular meetings are likely not necessary,
but the working group may set up video calls,
a private chat, or whatever other mechanism they decide upon internally.

The working group should aim for transparency,
posting all decisions publicly on
`discuss.python.org <https://discuss.python.org>`__,
with a rationale if possible.

> Before making a decision, the council should give

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before making a decision, the workgroup should give
```

        Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>,
        Steve Dower <steve.dower@python.org>,
        Irit Katriel <irit@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Topic: Typing
Created: 11-Oct-2023
Python-Version: 3.13

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to establish the C API Working Group:
a small committee of Python core developers responsible for
maintaining and developing the Python C API.

The working goup will maintain
documentation, test suites and tooling related to Python's C API.
It is the deciding body for changes to the C API,
from the addition or removal of individual API functions, types, etc.,
to the the acceptance of new designs of a more or less radical nature.

The working goup's mandate is to represent the interests of all Python users,
but especially all maintainers of code that uses Python's C API,
whether in the context of CPython, using an alternate Python implementation,
or using a binding framework for other languages.

The working group serves at the pleasure of the Python Steering Council.
The working group's members are the listed authors of this PEP.
This document serves as the working group's charter.

Epigraph
========

> .. |br| raw:: html
> 
>    <br />
> 
> KEEPER
> |br|
> Stop!
> Who would cross the Bridge of Death must answer me these questions three,
> ere the other side he see.
> 
> #. Who invented Python?
> #. In what year did Python 2.7 reach its End-of-Life?
> #. What is the future of the Python C API?
> 
> LANCELOT
> |br|
> Auuuuuuuugh!

Reviewer 4: There's [ReST for this](https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#line-blocks):
```suggestion
| KEEPER
| Stop!
  Who would cross the Bridge of Death must answer me these questions three,
  ere the other side he see.

#. Who invented Python?
#. In what year did Python 2.7 reach its End-of-Life?
#. What is the future of the Python C API?

| LANCELOT
| Auuuuuuuugh!
```

Author: Thanks, I committed a slight variation. I asked ChatGPT how to do this and it gave me the approach that I used (and several others, but that was the only one that seemed to work).
